[Music]
Good day. I'm Norman Wildberger. We're having
another look at arithmetic—the foundations of
arithmetic, the fundamental basis on which modern
mathematics is built. And it all comes down,
of course, to natural numbers and
the arithmetic with natural numbers.
And this turns out to be considerably
more subtle than it's usually thought,
because we've appreciated now the
huge complexity involved in larger
and larger numbers. This is a key
insight that we have been developing.
So we know now that just to hope that the
kinds of experience and understanding that
we have developed for smaller numbers—the hope
that that just extends in a natural way to all
natural numbers—is misguided. We have to
think carefully about the scale at which
we can legitimately and logically comprehend,
define, and prove our arithmetic is valid.
So the reality is probably that the currently
regarded theory of natural numbers is too wide,
it's too ambiguous, it's too all-embracing. We
need to actually be a little bit more careful
in prescribing different aspects of the things
which are now currently just clumped together.
In particular, there are at least three notably
distinct levels at which we can try
to access what natural numbers are:
The primitive natural number level, where we just
regard a natural number as an M-set of marks,
and we oblige ourselves to actually
write down such an M-set explicitly
and completely in order to have
the natural number. And that's a
reasonable type, which we have some
familiarity with now. That's "nat."
Then there are the Hindu-Arabic natural numbers,
the most familiar ones, of course, to us,
where we write down something like this: 3,793.
And we're going to move to try to understand what
that's all about in today's video, and we're
going to try to move towards establishing
some kind of definition for this other type
"num," which is distinguished from "nat."
But there's also this third level, which
we're aware of: the arithmetic expressions
for natural numbers, where we're allowed to
concoct expressions involving arithmetical
operations—simple ones like this, or maybe
even more complicated ones like we've been
looking at. And these are also candidates for
numbers, but they are definitely different
kinds of objects than these ones, and these
ones are different kinds of objects than
these ones. And they all have different
scales at which they're more appropriate.
Okay, that's an important thing to realize—that
relatively small numbers are well captured with
this; medium kinds of numbers are captured with
this; and very large numbers, you have to go to
some system like this. It's like Papa Bear,
Mama Bear, and Baby Bear kinds of numbers.
So we've had a look at primitive natural
numbers, and we've seen that they have
a simple arithmetic which is very easy
to understand and easy to compute with,
and that even relatively small
children can understand sort of why
this kind of arithmetic obeys the simple,
important arithmetical laws that it does.
When we go to Hindu-Arabic numbers, it's
really a quite different story. Okay,
so it turns out this is already a very
subtle issue about how to set up a theory
of Hindu-Arabic numbers. And we'll see here
that there are at least three different ways
of introducing them—at least three different ways
of orienting our approach to Hindu-Arabic numbers.
Now, we have to say, of course, and have
to recognize, that we are so familiar with
the Hindu-Arabic system because we've been
taught this system from a very early age,
and we have spent hours and hours—hundreds
of hours—practicing, learning, and seeing
applications of this Hindu-Arabic system.
So it's really almost hardwired into our
mental frameworks, and we shouldn't take that for
granted. Okay, it's actually not a replacement for
a solid logical foundation for what actually these
things are. So that's what we're looking for here.
We all know that we can, you know, do Hindu-Arabic
arithmetic, at least for relatively small numbers
where the calculator is not needed. But what
exactly is a Hindu-Arabic number, and what exactly
are the definitions of addition, multiplication,
and so on? And how does one actually prove the
laws of arithmetic for these objects? That
is what we're interested in here today.
So, our first approach to possibly setting up
Hindu-Arabic numbers is to regard them as short
forms for primitive natural numbers—that they
provide us with a convenient way of concisely
expressing these primitive natural numbers, which
can be quite onerous to write down and express. So
what we do is we look at the primitive natural
numbers, and we give them the usual names. So
this one here is called zero, and we give it
the alternate symbol that we're familiar with.
This thing here with a single mark in it is the
number one with its usual number. This is two,
this is three, and so on. This thing here
would be twenty-seven written like this. Okay,
we're all very familiar with the system here, but
we know that it does take some explaining. I mean,
to actually explain it to someone
who didn't know what it was about,
we'd have to talk about how we take one of these
big M-sets of marks and subdivide them into ones,
tens, hundreds, thousands, and so
on, and then count the numbers of
those various things and then string them
together in our sort of Hindu-Arabic list.
So if we proceed this way—and this is a
valid, possible way of proceeding—okay,
that a Hindu-Arabic number is just a
short form for a primitive natural number,
then the definition of operations on
Hindu-Arabic numbers simply reduces to
those of the primitive natural numbers. It's
just a reflection of this prior arithmetic
that we already have in place for the
primitive natural numbers. So instead
of saying "1111 + 1111 = 1111," something like
that, we might rather say "9 + 13 = 22." Okay,
it's just a shorthand for it. So logically, then,
nothing really too much in addition is required.
So if we do take this approach, then Hindu-Arabic
arithmetic is completely equivalent logically to
the arithmetic with natural numbers that we
already have—the arithmetic with primitive
natural numbers. And we can flag this usage in
the following way. So let's write the following:
that if we write seven is of type "nat," okay,
what that means is that seven is defined as this
thing here. So this is the actual object in
"nat." And when we write this, we agree that
this thing here is defined to be this. In
other words, this is another name for this.
Okay, why don't we do this then? End of story?
Because there's a serious disadvantage with this,
but it's a logical disadvantage that really only
becomes apparent once we step outside the bounds
of familiar, relatively small arithmetic.
The disadvantage is that we are logically
restricted to numbers less than 10^200.
Why? Because this is the maximum possible
size of a primitive natural number in our
universe, roughly. We've seen that if you
want to write down a bunch of ones or marks,
okay, the very, very most that you could do,
that is determined by how much room there is
in the universe and how small you can write.
And if you're writing at the very smallest
scale, which is, let's say, the Planck scale,
and you're writing to fill the entire universe,
then we've decided that there's roughly 10^200
such little Planck cubes filling our universe,
very roughly. Okay, and that's then an upper
bound for the number of marks that you can make.
Of course, you could never make anywhere near that
many marks, but at least in principle, we can
contemplate something like up to that amount.
Okay, but we are constrained roughly somewhere at
this level, right? We are not able to conceptually
even imagine in our universe M-sets of stuff
with a lot more than this number. For example,
these various numbers that we've been
talking about—Z or Z-prime or 3-star
n^2 4—right? These numbers are so big that
they completely overwhelm the possibility
of actually exhibiting an M-set with
this number of objects in it. Okay,
so that means that if we're going to attach our
Hindu-Arabic numbers to primitive natural numbers,
then we are constrained by whatever bounds we
have on the primitive natural numbers, and we are
constrained because the universe is probably only
so big, and we can write probably only so small.
So let me illustrate this point by giving you
an example of something that's arithmetically
impossible for us, even though we would actually
want it to be possible. So consider the question
of adding this natural number to one. Well, this
is the natural number 96511. I'm not going to tell
you all of it, okay? You can read it there.
It's a natural number with roughly about 200
digits. Therefore, this natural number is so
big that it represents the size of a set which,
or a multiset which, is impossible to conceive of
in our universe. We cannot write down and exhibit,
even theoretically, even in principle, an
M-set or a set which has this number of
objects in it. So if we're thinking about this
as representing a primitive natural number,
we are just stepping beyond the bounds of what
we actually can do. So we would have to look at
something like this and say, "I'm sorry, this does
not make any sense because we cannot interpret
this thing as a primitive natural number." But
this is too limiting for us. This is too limiting.
We want to be able to make calculations like
this because we all could make this calculation,
right? The end of doing this is you just
change that three to a four. Our computers
can deal with numbers which are this big—they
can do all kinds of great computations with
them. And if we're doing geometry in a sort of
integer framework or rational number framework,
once you go a few steps in complexity in some
actual specific situation where you're actually
making computations, then you shouldn't
be surprised to have bigger and bigger
numerators and denominators occurring—that'll
typically be what happens, okay? When you make
the addition of fractions or multiplication
of fractions, then the denominators and the
numerators generally get bigger. So every time you
make a computation, then you're increasing sizes,
and so it doesn't take that long before, you know,
we can realistically end up with numerators and
denominators that are of this order. We want to
be able to deal with them—we don't want to just
throw up our hands and say, "I'm sorry, that's no
longer supported by our theoretical constructs."
So we want to do bigger arithmetic, and
so we need to free "num" from "nat."
We do not want to identify these
two things. We do not want "num"
to just be a replacement or a short
form for "nat." That's too limiting.
All right, so notice how this understanding
really does depend on our investigations of
bigger numbers and our investigation about
complexity, right? We've been thinking about
complexity—we have this sense that, you
know, there are limits out there in terms
of how big you can write down expressions
and correspondingly how big are the numbers
that you have some realistic hope of writing
down in some fashion or another. All right,
so we're trying to address that—we're not
pretending that we're living in some unearthly
kind of universe where there's an infinite amount
of room and we can just do infinitely many things
just by waving our hands around. We're not doing
that—we want to really pin things down solidly.
All right, so what we want to do is we
want to free "num" from "nat." We want
to have our Hindu-Arabic number system
allow us bigger arithmetic than we can
do just with "nat." Not as great, but
we want to do something more. All right,
so let's look at a separate line of inquiry. Let's
think about Hindu-Arabic numbers as a separate
system from "nat," but which correlates with it.
So that's our aim—to try to see some direction
in which we could create a theory of natural
numbers based on Hindu-Arabic representation.
Okay, so this is a lot more work. This is a
lot fancier than dealing with primitive natural
numbers. It's several orders of magnitude more
complicated, in fact. In fact, I claim it has not
yet been done in 2016. There's no place where
you can find a proper theory of Hindu-Arabic
numbers. In particular, Peano-type axioms—some
of you will have heard of an axiomatic approach
to numbers—so Peano axioms don't really help us
either because Peano is resting on the idea of
building up natural numbers by successors. And if
you want to start with one and then you add one,
and then you add one, and then you add one,
and so on, and you want to kind of build up
an arithmetic, you're really essentially in
the realm of primitive natural numbers. Okay,
so Peano is just an axiomatic approach to what
we're calling natural numbers. In fact, it doesn't
really aid us considerably, but we'll talk about
Peano at some other point. But in any case,
Peano is not going to help us go beyond the
primitive natural numbers. We need to do
something else—we need to go beyond this
need to have our numbers connected with
an actual M-set or a sequence of things
that we can write down starting from one.
Okay, so here's a rough outline of
how to proceed. So here's a program
that somebody could think very carefully
about and work towards creating a theory
of Hindu-Arabic numbers. Isn't it remarkable
that in 2016, such a program is possible,
that there's this road that could be gone down
by somebody who's careful and serious enough
and really wants to do some work to establish
arithmetic? That's what we're talking about.
It's not some tangential thing built on top
of the extremities of a theory built on the
extremities of some other theory. This is core
mathematics we're discussing here, isn't it?
Okay, so how could we start? We could
start by defining Hindu-Arabic numbers
as expressions like this. Okay, that's not
so hard to do. So a Hindu-Arabic number is
an expression like this. And what does that
mean? Well, it's a list, or if you like,
a string of digits. The digits are all
taken from this set, the usual ones:
0 to 9. And the strings have the property that,
well, they can be arbitrary, except for the rule
that they can't begin with zero—they can't
begin with zero except for the single number
zero itself. That's the only number that can
start with the digit zero. By "start," I mean
the leftmost digit is zero, and all lists must
be non-empty. We're not allowing any empty lists.
All right, so that is a reasonable
definition of what a Hindu-Arabic number is,
and we can agree that you have a Hindu-Arabic
number precisely when you can write down such
a string. You can write down a string like
this one—you have a Hindu-Arabic number. So
we don't need to suppose that there's some
set somewhere that this is counting. Okay,
the Hindu-Arabic number is just this string
that you write down. That is a very sensible
and concrete and reasonable way of defining these
things into existence. That'd be like step one.
Okay, so now that we have the objects, the
numbers themselves, we are obliged to define
the operations—so say addition and multiplication,
the two ones that we usually start with. How are
we going to define these? So note that now it's no
longer possible for us to go back to the natural
numbers. We can't say, "Take your Hindu-Arabic
number and find an M-set or a collection or a
set that has that many objects in it, and take
your other Hindu-Arabic number and find another
M-set that has that many, and then dump them
together, and then count how many we have." Okay,
that works only if we're in the realm of
possibilities for exhibiting these M-sets,
and we've already sort of flagged that we are
going beyond that. Okay, so we cannot rely on
just converting our Hindu-Arabic numbers
to natural numbers and working there. But
nevertheless, we can still connect with
what we're doing with natural numbers.
So we could create addition and multiplication
tables. Okay, and so here's an addition table
for just the digits themselves, and here is a
multiplication table for the digits themselves.
Well, the tables are not complete, but I'm sure
you can all complete them. Okay, so one could
sort of write down these tables and say, "This
is how we're going to define the addition of
just our Hindu-Arabic numbers, which are given by
single digits. If we want to know what is 2 + 6,
we look under the table and we say, 'Ah, it's
8.' If we want to know what is 2 * 7, we look
under the table and we say, 'Ah, it's 14.'" Okay,
so of course this table doesn't tell us how to add
more generally, but it's a start. Okay, so we give
these tables, and we define the operations on the
single digits this way. And of course, we all know
that these things do come from our understanding
of natural numbers, the primitive natural numbers,
and how addition and multiplication work for them.
But in fact, we don't really need to say so. Okay,
we can just say, "Here are two tables, and we're
going to define addition and multiplication by
these tables." That's how we tell our computer
how to add digits—we don't have to explain to
the computer where we got these things from.
All right, so now for the second part of that
second step—we need to extend our understanding
or definition of addition and multiplication
to general Hindu-Arabic numbers. Okay,
because we've had lots of experience at this in
primary school, we know at least in principle
how this should proceed—or roughly, anyway.
Because we know how to use those addition and
multiplication tables to add and multiply more
general numbers. If we want to add 237 and 49,
we know that we start on the right and we
add seven and nine using the table—we get 16,
we write the six, we put the one up there,
and then we add three and four, we get seven,
we add the one, we get eight, and then we bring
this two down. If we want to multiply 237 by 49,
well, we multiply 9 * 7—63, we write the three,
we put the six up there; then 9 * 3 is 27,
we add the 6—that's 33, we put a three down,
there's a three coming up there, etc. All right,
so it's a question then of taking the familiar
knowledge about how to actually add Hindu-Arabic
numbers and telling our computer how to do
that—that's essentially what the definition is.
So extending our definition from single-digit
operations to general string operations.
All right, so this is a fair amount of work,
but it's not impossible. You could certainly
program a computer to do this, and in fact, if
you look at computers that do have code that
works on Hindu-Arabic numbers, well, they have
something like this, right? That's what they do.
And then we have a third challenge, which is
to prove the laws of arithmetic. This is more
challenging than you might think because you
are not allowed to use the prior knowledge of
arithmetic with natural numbers, with primitive
natural numbers, okay, except for small numbers.
So we can use the fact that for small numbers
we know that 3 + 7 + 8 is the same as 3 + 7 + 8,
you know, so we can use those things. But
we don't know that associativity or, say,
the distributive law or even commutativity
is necessarily going to be operating on
these huge Hindu-Arabic numbers. Of course,
we have this intuition that they will, okay,
but it's not a valid argument to say, "Well,
we just convert these big Hindu-Arabic numbers
to M-sets, and then we do the primitive natural
number operations there; we know that things are
commutative or associative or distributive there,
and then we go back up." That argument only holds
up to the limits of our natural or primitive
natural number system, and we're proposing
to go much beyond that. So we need separate,
independent proofs of the laws of arithmetic.
Can you appreciate that there's something to
be done here? And it's actually a considerable
amount of work, and it's not at all,
you know, immediately obvious what the
most efficient and elegant way of doing this
is. This would be a great Master's project,
I think, right? A student could easily
spend a year or two thinking about how
to do this really in a nice, elegant
way—it would be very instructive.
Okay, and so if we went down this road, which
I'm broadly outlining here, we could put that
together and then get a new system, which we
could call "num"—Hindu-Arabic numbers—which
extends the arithmetic of natural numbers
and coincides with it when there's overlap.
So you've probably guessed that that's not
how we're going to proceed. We're going to
proceed down a different path. So this is
the third approach that I want to suggest
to you in terms of establishing an arithmetic
for Hindu-Arabic numbers. So I propose that
Hindu-Arabic numbers can be viewed as multisets,
and when we take this M-set point of view,
then we can exploit things that we already
know, and we can create an alternate form of the
Hindu-Arabic arithmetic. But it will require us to
think a little bit differently, so we have to be
prepared to shift our orientation a little bit—but
you're used to that anyway on this channel, right?
Okay, so the motivation for this is
the following: suppose that we take
a Hindu-Arabic number like 43, which of course
is 3 + 4 * 10^1. So in terms of powers of 10,
which is naturally what's going on here, it's
3 * 10^0 plus 4 * 10^1. So here's another way
of representing that information as an M-set.
So here's an M-set—it's got square brackets and
no commas, and it's got repetitions. There
are three singletons here—singletons with
zeros in them—and there are four singletons
with ones in them, right? So these are just
like lists with one element, and there
are three zeros here to represent the
fact that there's 3 * 10^0 in this Hindu-Arabic
number, and there are four singletons with ones
to represent the fact that we have 4 * 10^1 in
this number here. So this is maybe rather long,
but it is a legitimate way of representing the
information contained in that Hindu-Arabic number.
Let's say we have a slightly
bigger one, like 512. Well,
that's 2 * 10^0 + 1 * 10^1 + 5 * 10^2. And
then that information can be represented
in an M-set point of view by having two
singletons of zeros, one singleton of one,
and five singletons of twos. This is then
an M-set which essentially contains the
information encoded in this Hindu-Arabic number,
and it does so in a way that actually corresponds
with what we're writing down. So you could look
at this and reasonably easily write down this
thing here without having to convert to a natural
number—so we're not going via "nat" here, okay?
Now, if we stare at these things, we say, "Wait
a minute, we've seen this kind of thing before."
These are just "vexels"—these are the kinds
of objects we were playing around with when
we were talking about maxel theory, our sort
of novel point of view towards matrices and
elementary linear algebra, right? Vexels were
some kind of M-set replacement for vectors,
and they're exactly like this—they're just
multisets of singletons, a singleton being
a list with a single natural number
in it, where a natural number now is
allowed to be zero as well. That's a little
bit of a difference from previously, okay?
So the possibility is now to harness
our earlier discussion, our earlier
discussion of vexels and that framework, to
harness that as a scaffolding to build up a
theory of Hindu-Arabic numbers. So we need
an arithmetic with vexels, and pleasantly,
this then also draws in earlier discussions
about pols and what we called poly numbers.
So we're going to be unifying a whole bunch of
things here—algebra in terms of poly numbers,
linear algebra in terms of these vexels, and
fundamental arithmetic in terms of Hindu-Arabic
numbers are all going to start being part
of the same intimately connected story.
We'll start on that next time.
Hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]